# Introduction & Aims{#sec:intro}

> *Movement is nothing but the quality of our being.*
>
> &mdash; Sunryu Suzuki, *Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind*

<!-- Why can't robots move like humans? What is special about human movement? -->
<!-- movement is a really hard problem, we want to understand why -->

Hans Moravec's eponymous paradox states that it is easier to generate artificially intelligent performance on tasks we think of as intellectually challenging, such as chess, than to provide a machine with faculties we take for granted, such as movement. For example, Moravec's Paradox encourages us to not look past the stunningly complex computations generated by the human motor apparatus. Following Moravec's suggestion, this work focuses on the human motor system, the most advanced control apparatus in the known universe.

A recent review corroborates this perspective and provides a clear call to action:

> The processes by which biological control solutions spanning large and continuous state spaces are constructed remain relatively unexplored. Future investigations may need to embed rich dynamical interactions between object dynamics and task goals in novel and complex movements [@McNamee2019].

Over the last few decades, there has been considerable amount of work done to untangle the abilities of the motor system to flexibly control the body including through optimal control theory[@Todorov2004], reinforcement learning in continuous action space[@koberReinforcementLearningRobotics2013], and detailed physiological studies[@sauerbreiCorticalPatternGeneration2019]. However, as the quote above suggests, a holistic understanding of the computations underlying the generation of skilled movement remains an open problem. The aim of this thesis is to progress our understanding of skilled movement by studying the solutions produced by human subjects to motor tasks in dynamically rich, yet controlled, virtual environments. Our goal is to reverse-engineer the ability to acquire and perform novel motor skills. First we define what we mean by the terms *skill*, and *task*.

<!-- humans have extraordinary motoric ability, we want to understand why -->
<!-- Robustness, Flexibility, Generalization, Composition -->
<!-- Why is this the most interesting problem?  -->

Humans produce a great variety of movements every day, often without conscious thought. For example, movements like bringing a cup of coffee to our lips for a sip are generally out of reach for state-of-the-art robotic systems. We claim that this "motor gap" between biological and artificial motor systems is due to a lack of *dexterity* in the latter. Soviet neuroscientist Nikolai Bernstein defined dexterity as the ability to "find a motor solution in any situation and in any condition."[@Bernstein1967] The crux of this definition is the flexibility of such solutions. This flexibility, or robustness^[Kitano defines robustness as "the maintenance of specific functionalities of the system against perturbations, and it often requires the system to change its mode of operation in a flexible way." He claims that robustness requires control, alternative mechanisms, modularity and decoupling between high and low level variability.][@kitanoBiologicalRobustness2004], is the ability to optimize internal parameters in response to external perturbations and adapt to new information to achieve the goals of an ongoing plan.

While a robot may be able to move a cup of coffee to a precise location in space, its solution is often found to be brittle in a new context, or unable to generalize to the movement of new objects. We define a skill as a behavior that involves dexterity in Bernstein's sense. The use of a tool such as a screwdriver is an example of a motor skill. We define a task as the production of skilled movement in a particular context. Driving a screw in a particular posture using a particular screwdriver is an example of a task. These concepts will be further formalized in later chapters. 

<!-- Physiology is special for human hands so we chose them as a testbed -->

Human movement is ultimately the result of the activation and contraction of muscle fibers, and movements lie on a spectrum between reflexive and volitional. The supramuscular circuitry which determines the degree of volition we ascribe to movement, where volitional movement relies on supraspinal (though not necessarily conscious) processes. The human hand is a unique evolutionary invention that underlies our ability to perform various skills in a range of tasks-- movements that are decidedly volitional^[It could be argued that the hand is in fact a crucial aspect of humanness. It is thought that the human cerebellar and neocortices evolved reciprocally to expand and support the computational burden of increasingly complex motor tasks such as tool-making and language production. REF?]. The hand is the pinnacle of dexterity and, as such, it is a fruitful testbed for studying the computations and circuitry that drive dexterous movement. A detailed physiological review of the hand and it's relation to skilled movement is described in {+@sec:physiology}.

<!-- Setting up a specific experiment will help us to track muscle-level changes -->

We are more interested in the leveraging the hand as a readout of flexible motor behavior than we are in the kinematics of hand movement itself. For this reason, we chose to develop an experimental setup that is capable of recording directly from muscle activations. We achieve this through surface electromyography recordings taken from the forearms controlling subjects' dominant hands. This allows us to track the sequential selection of muscle these contractions during skill acquisition and subsequent goal-oriented muscle activations. As we are interested in subjects' abilities to acquire new skills, we design tasks that require subjects to use available, but uncommon, motor activations. We then track the selection and execution of these activation during virtual tasks. The details of how this is achieved are described in {@sec:experiment}.



<!-- we think theorizing with control and learning models will help us -->
<!-- what exactly from the theory world will help us? why is control/RL relevant? -->
<!-- what are we missing in the neuro / behavior lit that we need to borrow? -->
<!-- BE MORE SPECIFIC HERE -->

<!-- Admit that we need to collect and analyze data in an exploratory manner to then inspire hypotheses that can be modeled. We want these hypotheses to be inspired by theoretical work in control and learning theory -->

how are value computations connected to action and policy selection
how are feedback controllers adapted to motor errors, new environments, how are they learned as well as combined?

Using data from our experimental setup, we hope to gain an understanding of how the structure of muscle activation variability in evolves during skill acquisition and how the motor system constructs skilled movement through the composition of component muscle coactivations. We believe that to make progress on these two lines of enquiry we should work to reconcile the language of the experimental sensorimotor control and learning community with the language of the control theory and reinforcement learning community, as each of these communities shares a common goal of understanding the computation underlying the production of skilled movement. Here we develop several models in this direction, as described in {+@sec:theory}.