## Corticomotoneuronal Connections

* Subdivisions of primary motor cortex based on cortico-motoneuronal cells (Rathelot, Strick PNAS 2008)
https://www.pnas.org/content/106/3/918

x Corticomotoneuronal cells are “functionally tuned”
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4829105/

Although CM synapses exert powerful excitatory effectsonα-motoneurons, the same motoneurons also receivemany other inputs (Fuglevand, 2011), including thosefrom Ia afferents, spinal interneurons, propriospinalneurons, reticulospinal neurons and rubrospinal neurons(Mewes & Cheney, 1991; Flamentet al.1992; Porter& Lemon, 1993; Perlmutteret al.1998; Riddleet al.2009). Any individualα-motoneuron receives thousandsofsynapticcontacts.Thehandfulofsynapticcontactsfroma given CM cell therefore does not consistently drive thedischarge of any particularα-motoneuron. (Schieber 2011)

rathelot, strick?

- "Following a century of detailed anatomical tract-tracing, electrophysiological investigation and careful lesion studies, our knowledge of the executive pathways through which ‘commands’ for movement must pass is unrivalled, yet we are still some way from really understanding how a movement is generated, which structures and pathways are involved and how they interact during the period leading up to movement onset."

- The intense, synchronised output generated by electrical stimulation of macaque motor cortex evokes responses in hand and digit muscles with onset latencies of only approximately 10ms. These latencies are much shorter than the 60–100 ms between the onset of changes in M1 activity and the onset of muscle activity during voluntarily generated movements (Cheney and Fetz, 1980; Porter and Lemon, 1993).

- The discovery that M1 neurons can become active during observation of the actions of others, but without any overt signs of movement in the observer (Vigneswaran et al., 2013) adds to a long list of evidence that motor cortex can be active in a number of different states, all of which are quite distinct from movement itself (Schieber, 2011). These include preparation for movement (Shenoy et al., 2013), mental rehearsal and imagination (Cisek and Kalaska, 2004; Dushanova and Donoghue, 2010; Macuga and Frey, 2012).

- PTNs exhibit additional features that are consistent with a role as ‘command’ neurons. These include the fact that they make many collaterals to important subcortical motor structures, such as the red nucleus and the pontine nuclei (Ugolini and Kuypers, 1986), thereby providing ‘efference copy’ of ‘commands’ to the cerebellum.

- A further feature of some primate PTNs is that they make direct cortico-motoneuronal (CM) connections to alpha motoneurons (Porter and Lemon, 1993; Rathelot and Strick, 2006; Zinger et al., 2013), allowing the motor cortex direct access to spinal motoneurons. Of course, the CM system does not act alone, but in parallel with many other local interneuronal mechanisms and other descending pathways (Baker, 2011; Lemon, 2008), seg- mental (Takei and Seki, 2010) and propriospinal systems (Kinoshita et al., 2012). It is interesting that CM synapses on motoneurons are not subject to presynaptic inhibition (Jackson et al., 2006), suggesting that other systems (e.g. peripheral affer- ent inputs from the moving limb) do not use this mechanism to modify CM inputs to motoneurons, which would mean that infor- mation delivered by CM projections is allowed unfettered influ- ence over target motoneurons.

- CM cells show changes in activity long before movement onset, far longer than the esti- mated conduction delays: thus CM cells exert their influence long before movement starts, but at a level that is subthreshold for motoneuron activation and subsequent movement.

- __CM cells are active for a whole range of different limb move- ments, including reach-to-grasp, precision grip and during tool- use by macaques (McKiernan et al., 1998; Muir and Lemon, 1983; Quallo et al., 2012). CM connections are particularly well- developed in primates with a high level of dexterity and who use tools. Interestingly, CM cells are characterised by showing not only increases, but also decreases in activity before and during precision movements (Maier et al., 1993; Quallo et al., 2012). Indeed, one way that M1 appears to control the pattern of muscle activity during grasp is to ‘disfacilitate’ the excitatory drive to motoneurons.__ (Lemon Kraskov 2019)

- The primate corticospinal tract shows many interesting features that distinguish it rather sharply from the rodent pathway. These include the size and dis- tribution of fibres within the tract, with a small but probably very significant population of fast-conducting axons (Firmin et al., 2014).



*There are very few tasks dealing with the hand in particular. What type of task would test the hypothesis that CM connections act to fractionate synergies of the hand such that we can tune a parameter of the task to require more or less influence of these direct connections? We would like to ask a user to fractionate synergies of the hand to different levels.*

This requires first mapping the intrinsic available dynamics of the hand per user.

We then would like to present fixed mappings between hand output (either through direct muscle activity or through a controller such as a force pad).

There is work suggesting that CM connections synapse primarily on low threshold motor units that are recruited first. This would imply a difference in synergy fractionation at lower force as opposed to higher force. This can be tested by adding a force parameter within a task.

This hunch was bolstered specifically by the work of Takei et al. in their 2017 PNAS paper:

> It is generally believed that the direct corticomotoneuronal (CM) pathway, which is a phylogenetically newer pathway in higher primates, plays a critical role in the fractionation of muscle ac- tivity during dexterous hand movements. However, the present study demonstrated that PreM-INs, which are phylogenetically older, have spatiotemporal properties that correlate with muscle synergies during voluntary hand movements. Therefore, it is likely that these two systems have specialized functions for the control of primate hand movements, namely “fractionated control” and “synergistic control,” respectively. The interaction of these two putative control systems might be the source of the exceptional versatility of primate hand move- ments. For example, a power grip (e.g., gripping a hammer) is characterized by the predominant coactivation of hand muscles. It is known that power grip requires less involvement of the CM system, and therefore might result more from the PreM-IN system. Conversely, fine control of individual finger movements (e.g., control of a fingertip force of a single digit) requires higher fractionation of individual muscles and probably depends more on the CM system. Indeed, muscle synergies are not active during fine individual finger movements in some cases. Precision grip requires the fractionation of hand muscles as well as their coactivation, and thus might depend on cooperation of both the CM and PreM-IN systems. These examples suggest that the optimal balance of the two control systems may vary according to task requirements. Optimization of balanced control may be an important factor also for the acquisition of new motor skills. For example, Berger et al. demonstrated that learning a new movement that is compatible with existing muscle synergies occurs much more quickly than learning a movement requiring new muscle synergies. This implies that establishing, modifying, or masking muscle synergies requires more training. This might explain our everyday experience that highly fractionated movements require extensive practice (e.g., using chopsticks requires more extensive training than using spoons). This conceptual framework of balanced control systems may help future studies to clarify how our nervous system controls and acquires versatile hand functions. [@Takei2017]

This notion of an "old" and "new" motor cortex is not conceptual, but has been shown using viral tracing techniques [@Rathelot2009].

As I see it, the goal is to build a falsifiable model which takes into account the bipartite structure of M1 into account, and find tasks that ostensibly require the direct descending connections to fractionate learned synergies. In effect, the hypothesis to test is that CM connections override the "consolidated" patterns putatively generated via spinal circuitry.

Thus, this is a learning question, an experimental problem, and a modeling task rolled into one. We have a good hunch that is backed up by solid work. The question comes down to how much we can learn by recording as much muscle activity as we can and designing very clever tasks to test very clever models.


### Porter & Lemon

It is clear that humans have the capacity to learn single motor unit (SMU) activation of the digits. Given what we know about voluntary movement and human digit control it is likely that this activation is under motor cortical control. This ability is somewhat surprising for two reasons:

1. Individual corticomotoneurons contact multiple motor pools, and rarely (if ever) individual motor neurons.
2. There is no physiological reason for the nervous system to have the ability to control individual muscles. The CNS (motor cortex in particular) is more likely to generate “complex” movements requiring simultaneous control of multiple synergistic muscle groups.

Given the fact that most CM cells appear to facilitate activity in several muscles, inhibition would appear to be essential for the recruitment of an individual muscle without any concurrent activity in its functional or anatomical synergists. But how is this inhibition recruited and maintained during and after learning?

I see two opportunities with this project. The first is practical: if we can generate definitive experimental evidence and a working theory for what is involved in voluntary control of single MUs in the forearm, we can build a ground-truth dataset for spike waveforms of various muscles under various conditions. The second is experimental: we can manipulate pertinent types of sensory feedback with the goal of answering interesting questions about the interplay between proprioception, agonist-antagonist interaction, and Renshaw cell functionality while building an understanding of how dynamics can be shifted for voluntary action to reverse engineer a learning process from the cellular level.

I’ve written below a little more background and detail on what I am thinking about, and would welcome your feedback and critique.

insights from studying the corticospinal tract

The brain seems a thoroughfare for nerve-action passing on its way to the motor animal. It has been remarked that Life’s aim is an act, not a thought. Today the dictum must be modified to admit that, often, to refrain from an act is no less an act than to commit one, because inhibition is co-equally with excitation a nervous activity. (Sherrington, Rede Lecture, 1933)

Since we’re working with a voluntary movement ostensibly of the digits, we know that we’re going to be dealing with the corticospinal tract. I discovered a book called The Corticospinal Tract and Voluntary Movement by Porter and Lemon (1995) – it’s awesome. I highly recommend it, especially Chapter 4. The book focuses mainly on the hand, and Roger Lemon seems to be a living legend.

The key insights from P&L:

The spinal cord’s neuronal organization is based on relatively rigid muscular synergies, and a mechanism to fractionate this is of particular importance for the muscles of the hands and digits which may need to be employed in a variety of flexible associations during voluntary movements.

[Obviously] the structure of corticospinal connectivity places a constraint on the number of possible output arrangements that can be employed by the cortex...

We can conclude that the fundamental organizing principle of the cortico-motoneuronal output is one of influence over activity in multiple muscles.

[Fetz 1980] found that 67 percent of their corticomotoneuronal cells contacted more than 2 of the 5–6 different muscles sampled, and that the mean number of muscles facilitated per cortico-motoneuronal cell was 2.4. [...] The majority of CM neurones (59 per cent) produced pure facilitation of either an agonist or antagonist, and cofacilitation of both was extremely rare. The second most common pattern (30 percent of CM cells) was facilitation of agonists and postspike suppression of antagonists.

Findings suggest that CM cell axons branch to innervate many (if not all) motor units within the motor nucleus of its target muscle.

The widespread synaptic impacts made within the motor nucleus of a single muscle would allow a single CM cell to exert a facilitatory influence over many different motoneurones, and therefore to contribute to motoneuronal activity over a range of EMG and force levels. A similar distributed system of synaptic connections has also been observed for muscle spindle afferents (Mendell and Hennemann 1971).

There are a large number of possible sources of common input to spinal motoneurones, including segmental afferent inputs from muscle spindles and other peripheral receptors. However, several lines of evidence suggest that, at least for hand muscle motoneurones, much of the short-term synchrony has a corticospinal origin.

Both refined histological and electro-anatomical observations on single corticomotoneuronal fibres in the monkey indicate significant divergence of the intraspinal collaterals of these fibres to impact on a large number of motoneurones. It is possible that, for some muscles acting about the distal joints of the limb, most or all of the motoneurones are engaged by synapses from each cortico-motoneuronal fibre which includes that muscle within its muscle field. The synaptic boutons that generate the cortico-motoneuronal synapses are small in size and only one or a few boutons are contributed to the motoneuron’s dendritic surface by each cortico-motoneuronal collateral. The contribution to the synaptic excitation of a motoneurone that is made by any one cortico- motoneuronal fibre is small. However, because of the high degree of convergence of intraspinal collaterals from a large colony of cortico-motoneuronal neurones on to each motoneurone of a distally acting muscle, this synaptic influence could allow fine grading of the depolarization of the motoneurone, contribute to the selective activation of motor units during voluntary movement and be critically effective in the fractionation of muscle usage during different motor tasks.

other literature (work on the extensor digitorum communis)

Things we still don’t fully know (that are probably beyond the scope of this project):

1. How extensive is the CM projection?
2. How many CM cells project to a given motoneuron or to a given muscle?
3. how large are the postsynaptic CM effects in a given motoneuron? [Lemon 2008]

Renshaw cells might play a role in isolating single MUs:

It is concluded that Renshaw cells de-correlate discharge patterns of different motoneurones of the same pool by injecting uncorrelated signals into them. This decorrelation is an important prerequisite for distortion suppression of signal transmission in a multi-channel system, like that of stretch reflex, and for its linearization. [Adam 1978]

Another report that people don’t know how they’re learning to isolate SMUs:

Although subjects used auditory synchrony feedback, they were generally unable to evaluate their success in modulating the amount of MU synchrony; nor could they describe any conscious strategy used during the successful sessions. They concentrated on the

occurrence of the synchrony pulses, rather than on the amount of EDC contraction or the concurrent force output. [Schmeid, 1993]

Implications that CM cells are responsible for fast changes in MU dynamics:

The present changes in short-term synchronization were detected in the course of the conditioning session and must reflect rapid alterations in the relative contributions of common inputs. One direct mechanism would involve a change in the proportion of descending monosynaptic input, such as the corticomotoneuronal cells that strongly affect EDC motoneurons (Phillips and Porter 1977; Fetz and Cheney 1980). [Schmeid, 1993]

Statement of unknowns about how dynamics are shifted at the MU level in terms of spinal circuitry:

Indirect control of MU synchronization might also be mediated by supraspinal modulation of the Renshaw decorrelating action (Gelfand et al. 1963; Adam et al. 1978), or by enhanced activity of spindle afferents via selective activation of gamma-motoneurons (Rudomin 1989). These possibilities suggest further experiments to resolve the neural mechanisms by which humans could rapidly alter short-term synchrony of MUs and, by implication, control the proportion of last-order common inputs to motoneurons. [Schmeid, 1993]
