## tiago 24_11_23

### review

- update null / task var -- this is reasonably stable, can tell a story for this chunk
- next chunk = variability over trials, visualizing this, PCA (and its problems), comparison to natural movement
- trajectory variability, means over trials, thinking about the "manifold" of the data, why we see the "X" pattern, steps to reconstruct
    - talk through the effect of the decoder, squashing uniform into a gaussian? decoder isn't responsible for X pattern
        - this explains why the decoder correlation doesn't explain performance!
        - it's not the decoder, its the subject-specific correlations
        - explain what NMF is doing (4 weight vectors to explain data), and why we end up with subjects who can't go left...?
    - X pattern is inherent in spatial correlations, as seen in the pairplots
        - is this captured by spatial covariance? or do we need more than that?
        - your gaussians are no good here? can't capture this kind of correlations along axes?


### next steps

- have to compile the latest into a document ASAP, that's the weekend plan
- how fucked am i...?
- thinking about theory side-- adding in policy gradient, comparing to (not fitting) the data for a nice discussion?


### driving questions for thesis structure / aims:

- how does the task work? pros and cons of the task?
    - open-ended, large intersubject spread, people are learning
    - not enough data per target (fewer samples than features)--> can we compress this?
- what are the general features of our data? "what is the manifold" (use UMAP on the whole dataset?)

- intersubject variation-- this is very high, just look at the task space
- what gives us these kinds of patterns?

- how much variability is, on average, along task and null space directions for the "active" EMG (times of movement)? (within-trial)
- how much variability is, on average, along task and null space directions for the final EMG endpoint? (cross-trial)
    - how do these compare? why do they look the way they do?
    - does this trend over trials?
    - does this correlate with subject attributes/performance? (hits, etc.)?

- what is the probability of trial-averaged movements under a linear model of hit end variability for each target?
- what is the probability of trial-averaged movements under a linear model of natural movement variability for each target?
    - how do these compare?
    - do we see a bias (mean, shape) in subject movements based on natural movements?
- Mog version of this


### notes

- we should be, as much as possible, trying to fairly center our data -- which mean to choose is a tough call, to make sure our comparisons are soung
    - e.g. natural data is very "raw" -- no mean shifting, etc. Choose which means to center with carefully and justify these!
- should I have trained a decoder based on a subject trying to move to a target?

### tal questions
- am i thinking about these modes the right way?
    - what's the best result to show here?

### tal notes
- decoders are ~gaussian-- like a gaussian filter
- plot the rest of the natural movement, do these look like trial trajectories? 
    - do nat stats "cover" the targets? this means they're "accessible"
    - check this by literally visualizing w histogram p(x,y)
    - prediction is now ~p(x,y) based on natural stats -- smooth this histo and use it 
- compare nat stats to trial stats get a sense of the difference, shift, whatever
    - fit MoGs to natural statistics
- does PCA make sense? (does gaussianity make sense)
    - if you take a "global mean" of all the movement-- this might make sense?
    - but then you'd have to fit the model to all of that data to subtract the same mean
- question: can you capture these stats with a single gaussian?
    - if emg is jointly gaussian, the marginals all have to be gaussian
    - so no! but we think we can capture 
- fix the lims on the pairplots
- can MoG capture the "dick plots"?
- mean substract the quiescent period / low point to remove offsets

### possible todos
- generate a toy gaussian mixture model and sample this
    - think about the expected structure of this-- some very strongly correlated variables, some with no covariance?
    - run this through the decoder to see if you get the X pattern, think about why or why not
    - to get "X"s what does the constraint of the data manifold have to be?
        - **activating subsets of channels "modes"? modes are channels which are are highly correlated + gaussian noise. so these are subspaces of emg space with gaussian blobs
        - the covariances of these gaussian blobs are then channel-wise subsets which are highly (anti)correlated
        - some channels themselves are hotter -- that's the diagonal, high variance
        - related channels

- illustrate nonnegativity with a toy 2D model? 
    - generate some clusters, run NMF on them, plot the axes
    - do the same for PCA shifted and unshifted?

- load and save the active natural movement dataset
    - mean shift carefully (using quiescents)?
    - plot this on top of trial trajectory distributions
- load and save the calibration dataset
    - get a sense of its shape?
    - run it through the decoder, plot on top of trial

- take note of which subjects have strong biases in their trajectory outputs
    - which subjects have the "X" patterns or left/right bias
- try "running through the decoder" for different subjects decoders

- UMAP the whole dataset? just to see if the manifold is in fact weirdly shaped. if it's a blob, gaussians are probably ok
    - if weird, gaussian mixture + decoder projection to explain the X pattern?
        - use this to explain performance

- plot distributions through the decoder, 2D histograms, next to the trajectories
    - dig into the EMG distribution with pairplots?
    - recreate the X pattern, can't do it with just gaussians-- why?
- pass natural data through the decoder and plot distributions

### tiago notes

- effect of decoders as gaussian filter + projection onto a plane is important
- important: relating shape of distributions to performance